# Avoiding Terminations, Single Offer Competition, and Costly Change Orders with Fixed-price Contracts

## Introduction
The nonpartisan, nonprofit Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) recognizes that for policymakers to be effective stewards of the Department of Defense's (DoD) public funds, they must understand the mechanism by which these funds are distributed to vendors. This ongoing researchs analyze when fixed price contracts deliver the best results and when they encounter disproportionate problems.

Both the executive branch and Congress have considered increasing the use of fixed price contracting as a means of handling cost overruns by changing incentives and shifting risk to vendors. However, this policy focus has come in cycles. In 2010, the first set of DoD Better Buying Power Initiatives called for greater use of fixed price incentive fee contracts when appropriate. The second iteration of these reforms in 2012 suggested fixed price for low rate initial production but emphasized contracting officer discretion in choosing the right pricing mechanism. In 2013, the annual report on the Performance of the Defense Acquisition System reinforced this change, finding that use of fixed price contract types were not themselves correlated with cost savings. Throughout this debate, all sides agree that fixed price contracts are more appropriate in some cases than in others. 

In service of determining where fixed price contracts are more and less appropriate, this research will provide a data-driven analysis of where fixed price contracts have resulted in negative outcomes. Using contracting data in the Federal Procurement Data System, CSIS is identifying these negative outcomes by: 
*	Measuring the exclusion of potential vendors or diminished industrial based capacity via the metric of single-offer competition. This draws on an existing CSIS capacity but has not previously been applied at the contract level.
*	Measuring contract failure using the metric of contract termination. This variable repre-sents a new capability because it requires drawing on a single contract’s data across multiple years when appropriate.
*	Measuring requirement stability using the metric of costly change orders. This is the most demanding new capability and it requires not just the multiple year analysis for measuring contract termination, but also demands differentiating between different sorts of contract modifications, many of which do not constitute requirements volatility.

This capability to evaluate outcomes breaks new ground for what can be done with open source procurement research. The study is examing the correlation of these data with additional variables, including product or service category, DoD contracting offices at the major command level, and a range of contract characteristics. This will provide DoD and the public with a deeper understanding of how fixed price contracts can be most effectively used and where current contracting does and does not align with these findings. This will be especially relevant as defense investment budgets continue to decline. 

This study is being undertaking with the sponsorship of the Washington Headquarters Service and the preliminary reserach will be submitted to the  Naval Postgraduate School’s 12th Annual Acquisition Research Symposium in 2015. 

## Work Plan

This project uses three dependent variables to measure whether a contract is suitable for a fixed pricing mechanism, the latter two representing a significant capability developed by this contract that will be broadly useful for future quantitative open source procurement researchers: single-offer competition, contract termination, and costly change orders.

The study is cross-referencing these outcomes with independent variables, including major DoD contracting office by major command, product or service type, initial contract size, initial contract duration, extent of competition, and contract vehicle, to evaluate what contract characteristics are correlated with the best outcomes. Reflecting the findings of the Performance of the Defense Acquisition System, the classification used for contract vehicle will include whether a contract is undefinitized. This in-depth, data-driven study will thus result in easy to apply findings to aid in identifying when fixed priced contracts are best used and highlight those areas where DoD is over- or under-using this pricing mechanism.

The research effort will draw upon three primary sources:
1	Federal Procurement Data System (FPDS): The FPDS is a publicly available database of every unclassified government contract, with millions of entries each year.  Each entry has extensive data on the vendors, contract type, competition, place of performance, and a variety of other topics as mandated by Congress.  
2	Government Accountability Office and Inspector General reports:  Reports by watchdog agencies are used to confirm that the CSIS methodology is correctly categorizing terminations and costly overruns for a subset of covered contracts.
3	Selected Acquisition Reports and DoD Budget Materials: As with category 2, these sources aid in the validation of categorizing terminations and costly overruns for major defense acquisition programs.
